# EVENTS

## User Interface (UI) Events:
- load -- fires when the page finished loading iages, scripts or objects.
- unload -- fires when the page is unloading because a new page has been requested.
- error -- fires when a JS error is found.
- resize -- fires when the browser sie is resized.
- scroll -- fires when the user scroll up or down the page or a specific element on the page.

## Keyboard Events (also inputs events):
- ``input`` -- when the value of an ``<input>`` or ``<textarea>`` change.
- keydown: when a used press a key for first time (and also if the key is depressed)
- ``keypress``: when key is pressed and it result in a character on the screen. (see <ins>``Example-3-Keyboard-Events``)
- keyup: user release a key

## Mouse Events:
- ``click``: click in an element as a div or a botom (see <ins>``Example-1-Event-Listener``)
- ``dbclick: doble click
- ``mousedown: press the mouse botton over an element
- ``mouseup: release the mouse botton over an element
- ``mousemove: 
- ``mouseover: move move over an element but not click
- ``mouseout: move the mouse out of an element but not click
- ``blur`` we put the mouse out of the element(see  <ins>``Example-2-Mouse-Events/focus-and-blur-Event``)
- ``focus``: when we put the mouse over a elment (see <ins>``Example-2-Mouse-Events/focus-and-blur-Event``)

## Form Events:
- ``submit`` -- when a form is submitted (As the conditions in a website that must be validate) - (see <ins>``Example-4-Form-Events``)
- ``change`` -- when the status of several forms change - (see <ins>``Example-4-Form-Events``)
- ``input`` -- when the value of an ``<input>`` or ``<textarea>`` change.
- reset
- cut
- copy
- paste
- select

---

## <ins>EVENT HANDLING:

 ### 1. HTML event handler attirbutes: **``DO NOT USE ``** (*it is a bad practice*)

### 2. Traditional DOM event Handlers: 
```javascript
    element.onevent = functionName;
``` 
We write the function without parentheses because we do not want it to fire/be raised 
at the moment, just when we interact with the DOM element.

**EXAMPLE:**
```javascript
    const checkUser = () => {
        const message = document.getElementById('feedback');
        if(this.value.length < 5){
            mensaje.textContent = 'Username must be 5 characters or more';
        }else{
            mensaje.textContent = '';
        }
    };

    const element = document.getElmentbyId('userName');
    element.onblur = checkUser;
```

## <ins> EVENT LISTENERS</ins> (see <ins>``Example-1-Event-Listener``)
```js
    element.addEventListener('event', functionName, useCapture);
```
The last argument of ``addEventListener`` is the event flow.
If we do not write it is set as ``false``. This means that the event activate at the end (``"bubble"``).
If it is ``true`` it activate at the geginning (``"capture"``)

**EXAMPLE:**
```js
    const grandparent = document.querySelector('.grandparent');

    grandparent.addEventListener('click', () => {
        console.log('Grandparent Capture')
    }, { capture: true })
```

### <ins>**EVENT FLOWING**
The flow of event only matters when an element and its ancestor/descendant elements has a event handlers.

<ins>Event Bubbling</ins>: the events fired from the internal element to out.
<ins>Event Capturing</ins>: the events fired from the out element to most internal.

The last argument can be:
- ``capture:`` So they avoid Bubbling events.
- ``once:`` So it only fire one time. And do not fire more even we click or intercat with it.

### **Remove an event listener:**
```js
    element.removeEventListener('event',functionName)
```

### <ins>**THE EVENT OBJECT**
- When a event occurs in HTML the event belongs to an specific event object.
- This Event Obj. tell us where the event occurs (in the ``screen``, ``page`` or ``client``)
- The event object is passed to any function that is in the event handler or event.

- To pass an argument in the ``.addEventListener`` the event object (e) is first passed to the anonymous function that is inside.
```js
document.addEventListener('click', e => {
    if (e.target.matches('div')) {
        console.log('Eooo')
    }
}, false)
```

### <ins>Property</ins>:
- ``target`` -- is a referencte to the object which fire the event.
- type -- type of event.
- cancelable`-- to cancel the default behavior of an element.


### <ins>Method</ins>:
    - preventDefault( ) -- cancel default behavior of the event (if it can be canceled)
    - stopPropagation( ) -- stop the event from bubbling or capturing any further.


### <ins> Determining Position:
- We use the ``event obj`` which have some position properties:
    - event.screenX
    - event.screenY
    - event.pageX
    - event.pageY
    - event.clientX
    - event.clientY

### <ins> Key Pressed:</ins> (see ``Example-3-Keyboard-Events``)
- The ``event obj`` has property ``keyCode`` that tell which key was pressed (but it return an ASCII code)
- (We can get the letter using ``String.fromCharCode(event.keycode)``)

---

## How to code with Events:
1. First is to save in ``variable`` the HTML element that we want to add a ``Listener``:
```js
    const element = document.getElementById('idName');
```
2. Add the ``Event Listener``:
```js
    element.addEventListener('event', function, false);
```
`3.` Create and define the function.

---

## Mutation Events & Observes:

### <ins> Mutation Events:
When the DOM changes some events just tigger. The problem is that if we add to many the page will feel slow:
- DOMNodeInserted -- fire when a node is inserted (appendChild, replaceChild or insertBefore)
- DOMNodeRemoved -- fire when a node is removed (removeChild, replaceChild)
- DOMSubtewwModified -- fires when the DOM structure changes, when the DOMNodeInsterted and the DOWNodeRemoved, both fire.
- DOMNodeInsertedIntoDocument -- fires when a node is inserted into the DOM tree as a descendant of aother node from the document.
- DOMNodeReovedFromDocument -- fires when a node is removed into the DOM tree as a descendant of aother node from the document.

### <ins> ``Mutation Observes``:
They are deisgn to wait until a script has finished to start reacting. we can also specify the type of changes that we want to react.